Changelog rendering
===================

Two-step model
--------------

``releaseledger changelog`` renders review context. Use it when a human or
coding agent needs release metadata, entries, target-file guidance, and optional
lint findings. Pass ``--include-sources`` to include provenance refs in Markdown
output.

``releaseledger build`` renders the final changelog section and inserts it into
the target file. Use ``--dry-run`` before writing and ``--replace-existing`` when
re-rendering an existing release section. Pass ``--template NAME`` to select a
named changelog template profile.

Full changelog rebuild
----------------------

``releaseledger build`` with no ``VERSION`` (or ``releaseledger build --all``)
rebuilds the **complete** target file from ledger state:

- ``releaseledger build VERSION`` updates one release section.
- ``releaseledger build`` or ``releaseledger build --all`` rebuilds the whole
  target file from ledger state.
- Full rebuild excludes internal entries and non-released releases by default.
- Use ``--include-internal`` only for internal release notes.
- Use ``--include-release-status`` to include candidate/planned sections
  explicitly.
- Full rebuild preserves the ``## [Unreleased]`` body by default
  (``--no-preserve-unreleased`` clears it) and is a whole-file rewrite (no
  ``--replace-existing``).

Default template
----------------

The default ``.releaseledger.toml`` contains:

.. code-block:: toml

   [changelog]
   output = "CHANGELOG.md"
   trim = true
   render_always = false
   header = ""
   body = """
   ## {% if release.date %}[{{ release.version }}] - {{ release.date }}{% else %}[{{ release.version }}] - Unreleased{% endif %}

   {% for group in groups %}
   ### {{ group.title }}
   {% for entry in group.entries %}
   - {% if entry.breaking %}**BREAKING:** {% endif %}{{ entry.summary }}
   {% endfor %}

   {% endfor %}
   """
   footer = "<!-- generated by releaseledger -->"
   postprocessors = []

Template context
----------------

Templates run in a sandboxed Jinja2 environment and may access:

``project``
   Project or ledger name.

``release``
   The target release payload, including ``version`` and effective ``date``.

``entries``
   Included entry payloads.

``groups``
   Entries grouped by changelog title.

``releases``
   Known release payloads.

Postprocessors
--------------

Postprocessors apply literal string replacements after template rendering:

.. code-block:: toml

   postprocessors = [
     { pattern = "releaseledger", replace = "Releaseledger" },
   ]

Strict builds
-------------

``releaseledger build --strict`` blocks on entry lint errors, empty included
entries unless ``--allow-empty`` is supplied, and release source refs that are
not covered by included entries.

Release review
---------------

``releaseledger review VERSION`` is a read-only coverage report. It combines
release state, entry coverage, orphan detection, entry lint, and a strict
changelog dry-run into one deterministic report so agents and humans do not
need to run ``release show``, ``entry list``, ``entry lint``, ``changelog``,
and ``build --dry-run`` separately.

Each expected source ref (``release.source_refs`` plus ``boundary_ref``) is
classified as ``covered``, ``draft_only``, ``rejected_only``,
``internal_only``, or ``missing``. Accepted entries with no provenance
(empty ``source_refs``, ``issues``, ``prs``, and ``sources``) are reported as
orphans. ``--strict`` exits non-zero when the release is not OK.

Run review before adding a new entry. If the same ``source_ref`` is already
covered by an accepted entry, update the existing entry instead of adding a
duplicate.

.. code-block:: text

   releaseledger review 0.5.0
   releaseledger --json review 0.5.0
   releaseledger review 0.5.0 --strict --target-file CHANGELOG.md


Section correction
------------------

When a release section in the target changelog is stale (wrong version number
or a canceled release), correct it with the section helpers rather than editing
the file by hand:

.. code-block:: text

   releaseledger changelog-section rename-section OLD NEW --target-file CHANGELOG.md
   releaseledger changelog-section remove-section VERSION --target-file CHANGELOG.md

``release rename --rename-changelog-section`` and
``release cancel --remove-changelog-section`` apply the same corrections as part
of a release correction. Both fail when the source section is missing unless
``--ignore-missing`` is passed, and ``rename-section`` fails when the
destination section already exists unless ``--replace-existing`` is passed.
